'INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME          I This report is submitted to the Attorney General pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 600.8(c), which states that , "[a]t the conclusion of the Special Counsel \' s work, he ... shall provide the Attorney General a confidential report explaining the prosecution or declination decisions [the Special Counsel] reached." The Russian government interfered in the 2016 presidential election in sweeping and systematic fashion. Evidence of Russian government operations began to surface in mid-2016. In June, the Democratic National Committee and its cyber response team publicly announced that Russian hackers had compromised its computer network. Releases of hacked materials-hacks that public reporting soon attributed to the Russian government-began                that same month. Additional releases followed in July through the organization WikiLeaks, with further releases in October and November. In late July 2016, soon after WikiLeaks\'s first release of stolen documents, a foreign government contacted the FBI about a May 2016 encounter with Trump Campaign foreign policy advisor George Papadopoulos. Papadopoulos had suggested to a representative of that foreign government that the Trump Campaign had received indications from the Russian government that it could assist the Campaign through the anonymous release of information damaging to Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. That information prompted the FBI on July 31, 2016, to open an investigation into whether individuals associated with the Trump Campaign were coordinating with the Russian government in its interference activities. That fall, two federal agencies jointly announced that the Russian government "directed recent compromises of e-mails from US persons and institutions, including US political organizations," and , " [t]hese thefts and disclosures are intended to interfere with the US election process." After the election, in late December 2016, the United States imposed sanctions on Russia for having interfered in the election. By early 2017, several congressional committees were examining Russia\'s interference in the election. Within the Executive Branch, these investigatory efforts ultimately led to the May 2017 appointment of Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller, III. The order appointing the Special Counsel authorized him to investigate "the Russian government\'s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election ," including any links or coordination between the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign. As set forth in detail in this report, the Special Counsel\'s investigation established that Russia interfere~ in the 2016 presidential election principally through two operations. First, a Russian entity carried out a social media campaign that favored presidential candidate Donald J. Trump and disparaged presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. Second , a Russian intelligence service conducted computer-intrusion operations against entities, employees, and volunteers working on the Clinton Campaign and then released stolen documents. The investigation also identified numerous links between the Russian government and the Trump Campaign. Although the investigation established that the Russian government perceived it would benefit from a Trump presidency and worked to secure that outcome, and that the Campaign expected it would benefit NA U.S. Department of Justice Atterttey Werk Predttet // Ma~· Cetttaitt Material Prnteeted Uttder Fed. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) electorally from information stolen and released through Russian efforts, the investigation did not establish that members of the Trump Campaign conspired or coordinated with the Russian government in its election interference activities. * * * Below we describe the evidentiary considerations underpinning statements about the results of our investigation and the Special Counsel\'s charging decisions, and we then provide an overview of the two volumes of our report. The report describes actions and events that the Special Counsel\'s Office found to be supp01ted by the evidence collected in our investigation. In some instances, the report points out the absence of evidence or conflicts in the evidence about a particular fact or event. In other instances, when substantial, credible evidence enabled the Office to reach a conclusion with confidence, the report states that the investigation established that certain actions or events occurred. A statement that the investigation did not establish particular facts does not mean there was no evidence of those facts. In evaluating whether evidence about collective action of multiple individuals constituted a crime, we applied the framework of conspiracy law, not the concept of "collusion." In so doing, the Office recognized that the word "collud[ e]" was used in communications with the Acting Attorney General confirming certain aspects of the investigation\'s scope and that the term has frequently been invoked in public reporting about the investigation. But collusion is not a specific offense or theory of liability found in the United States Code, nor is it a term of art in federal criminal law. For those reasons , the Office\'s focus in analyzing questions of joint criminal liability was on conspiracy as defined in federal law. In connection with that analysis, we addressed the factual question whether members of the Trump Campaign "coordinat[ ed]"-a term that appears in the appointment order-with         Russian election interference activities.       Like collusion, "coordination" does not have a settled definition in federal criminal law. We understood coordination to require an agreement-tacit or express - between the Trump Campaign and the Russian government on election interference. That requires more than the two parties taking actions that were informed by or responsive to the other\'s actions or interests. We applied the term coordination in that sense when stating in the report that the investigation did not establish that the Trump Campaign coordinated with the Russian government in its election interference activities. * * * The report on our investigation consists of two volumes: Volume I describes the factual results of the Special Counsel\'s investigation of Russia\'s interference in the 2016 presidential election and its interactions with the Trump Campaign. Section I describes the scope of the investigation. Sections II and III describe the principal ways Russia interfered in the 2016 presidential election . Section IV describes links between the Russian · 2 NA U.S. Department of Justice Att:arAe~·Wark Praattet // Me~· C0Atttil\'lMttterittl Prateetea UAaer red. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign. Section V sets forth the Special Counsel\'s charging decisions. Volume II addresses the President \' s actions towards the FBI\'s investigation into Russia \' s interference in the 2016 presidential election and related matters, and his actions towards the Special Counsel \' s investigation. Volume II separately states its framework and the considerations that guided that investigation. 3 NA U.S. Department of Justice Atterrte~· Werk Predttet // May Cetttairt Material Preteetee Urteer Fee. R. Crim. P. 6(e) EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TO VOLUME           I RUSSIAN SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGN The Internet Research Agency (IRA) carried out the earliest Russian interference operations identified by the investigation - a social media campaign designed to provoke and amplify political and social discord in the United States. The IRA was based in St. Petersburg, Russia, and received funding from Russian oligarch Y evgeniy Prigozhin and companies he controlled. Pri ozhin is widel re orted to have ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin In mid-2014, the IRA sent em lo mission with instructions The IRA later used social media accounts and interest groups to sow discord in the U.S. political system through what it termed "information warfare." The campaign evolved from a generalized program designed in 2014 and 2015 to undermine the U.S . electoral system, to a targeted operation that by early 2016 favored candidate Trump and disparaged candidate Clinton. The IRA\' s operation also included the purchase of political advertisements on social media in the names of U.S. persons and entities, as well as the staging of political rallies inside the United States. To organize those rallies, IRA employees posed as U.S. grassroots entities and persons and made contact with Trump supporters and Trump Campaign officials in the United States. The investigation did not identify evidence that any U.S. persons conspired or coordinated with the IRA. Section II of this report details the Office\'s investigation of the Russian social media campaign. RUSSIAN HACKING OPERATIONS At the same time that the IRA operation began to focus ·on supporting candidate Trump in early 2016, the Russian government employed a second form of interference: cyber intrusions (hacking) and releases of hacked materials damaging to the Clinton Campaign. The Russian intelligence service known as the Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Army (GRU) carried out these operations. In March 2016, the GRU began hacking the email accounts of Clinton Campaign volunteers and employees, including campaign chairman John Podesta. In April 2016, the GRU hacked into the computer networks of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) and the Democratic National Committee (DNC). The GRU stole hundreds of thousands of documents from the compromised email accounts and networks. Around the time that the DNC announced in mid-June 2016 the Russian government\'s role in hacking its network, the GRU began disseminating stolen materials through the fictitious online personas "DCLeaks" and "Guccifer 2.0." The GRU later released additional materials through the organization WikiLeaks. 4 NA U.S. Department of Justice AH:erHey\\¥Brit Pr6d1:1et// Mtty Cet1:tttiflMttterittl Preteeted Ut1:derFed. R. Ct1iffl.P. 6(e) The presidential campaign of Donald J. Trump ("Trump Campaign" or "Campaign") showed interest in WikiLeaks \' s releases of documents and welcomed their otential to damage candidate Clinton . Beginning in June 2016, llfilllillliliilfll~llliillllllilllilli           forecast to senior Campaign officials that WikiLeaks would release information damaging to candidate Clinton. WikiLeaks \' s first release came in July 2016. Around the same time , candidate Trump announced that he hoped Russia would recover emails described as missing from a private server used b Clinton when she was Secreta of State he later said that he was s · eakin sarcasticall . WikiLeaks began releasing Podesta \' s stolen emails on October 7, 2016, less than one hour after a U.S. media outlet released video considered damaging to candidate Trump. Section lII of this Report details the Office\'s investigation into the Russian hacking operations, as well as other efforts by Trump Campaign supporters to obtain Clinton-related emails. RUSSIAN CONTACTS WITH THE CAMPAIGN The social media campaign and the GRU hacking operations coincided with a series of contacts between Trump Campaign officials and individuals with ties to the Russian government. The Office investigated whether those contacts reflected or resulted in the Campaign conspiring or coordinating with Russia in its election-interference activities. Although the investigation established that the Russian government perceived it would benefit from a Trump presidency and worked to secure that outcome, and that the Campaign expected it would benefit electorally from information stolen and released through Russian efforts, the investigation did not establish that members of the Trump Campaign conspired or coordinated with the Russian government in its election interference activities . The Russian contacts consisted of business connections, offers of assistance to the Campaign, invitations for candidate Trump and Putin to meet in person , invitations for Campaign officials and representatives of the Russian government to meet, and policy positions seeking improved U.S.-Russian relations. Section IV of this Report details the contacts between Russia and the Trump Campaign during the campaign and transition periods , the most salient of which are summarized below in chronological order. 2015. Some of the earliest contacts were made in connection with a Trump Organization real-estate project in Russia known as Trump Tower Moscow. Candidate Trump signed a Letter oflntent for Trump Tower Moscow by November 2015, and in January 2016 Trump Organization executive Michael Cohen emailed and spoke about the project with the office of Russian government press secretary Dmitry Peskov. The Trump Organization pursued the project through at least June 2016 , including by considering travel to Russia by Cohen and candidate Trump. Spring 2016. Campaign foreign policy advisor George Papadopoulos made early contact with Joseph Mifsud, a London-based professor who had connections to Russia and traveled to Moscow in April 2016. Immediately upon his return to London from that trip , Mifsud told Papadopoulos that the Russian government had "dirt" on Hillary Clinton in the form of thousands 5 NA U.S. Department of Justice l\\.ttortte~·Work Pt\'od1:1et // Mtty Cotttttitt Mttterittl Proteeted Uttder Fed. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) of emails. One week later, in the first week of May 2016, Papadopoulos suggested to a representative of a foreign government that the Trump Campaign had received indications from the Russian government that it could assist the Campaign through the anonymous release of information damaging to candidate Clinton. Throughout that period of time and for several months thereafter, Papadopoulos worked with Mifsud and two Russian nationals to arrange a meeting between the Campaign and the Russian government. No meeting took place. Summer 2016. Russian outreach to the Trump Campaign continued into the summer of 2016, as candidate Trump was becoming the presumptive Republican nominee for President. On June 9, 2016, for example, a Russian lawyer met with senior Trump Campaign officials Donald Trump Jr., Jared Kushner, and campaign chairman Paul Manafort to deliver what the email proposing the meeting had described as "official documents and information that would incriminate Hillary." The materials were offered to Trump Jr. as "part of Russia and its government\'s support for Mr. Trump." The written communications setting up the meeting showed that the Campaign anticipated receiving information from Russia that could assist candidate Trump\'s electoral prospects, but the Russian lawyer \' s presentation did not provide such information. Days after the June 9 meeting, on June 14, 2016, a cybersecurity firm and the DNC announced that Russian government hackers had infiltrated the DNC and obtained access to opposition research on candidate Trump, among other documents. In July 2016 , Campaign foreign policy advisor Carter Page traveled in his personal capacity to Moscow and gave the keynote address at the New Economic School. Page had lived and worked in Russia between 2003 and 2007 . After returning to the United States, Page became acquainted with at least two Russian intelligence officers, one of whom was later charged in 2015 with conspiracy to act as an unregistered agent of Russia . Page \' s July 2016 trip to Moscow and his advocacy for pro-Russian foreign policy drew media attention . The Campaign then distanced itself from Page and, by late September 2016, removed him from the Campaign. July 2016 was also the month WikiLeaks first released emails stolen by the GRU from the DNC. On July 22, 2016, WikiLeaks posted thousands of internal DNC documents revealing information about the Clinton Campaign. Within days, there was public reporting that U.S. intelligence agencies had "high confidence" that the Russian government was .behind the theft of emails and documents from the DNC. And within a week of the release, a foreign government informed the FBI about its May 2016 interaction with Papadopoulos and his statement that the Russian government could assist the Trump Campaign. On July 31, 2016 , based on the foreign government rep01ting, the FBI opened an investigation into potential coordination between the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign. Separately, on August 2, 2016 , Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort met in New York City with his long-time business associate Konstantin Kilimnik, who the FBI assesses to have ties to Russian intelligence. Kilimnik requested the meeting to deliver in person a peace plan for Ukraine that Manafort acknowledged to the Special Counsel\'s Office was a "backdoor" way for Russia to control part of eastern Ukraine; both men believed the plan would require candidate Trump \'s assent to succeed (were he to be elected President). They also discussed the status of the 6 NA U.S. Department of Justice Atteffle\'.}\'Nm•kP1:1edttet // May Cm~taittMaterial Preteetecl Uttcler Fed. R. C1:1im. P. 6(e) Trump Campaign and Manafort\'s strategy for winning Democratic votes in Midwestern states. Months before that meeting, Manafort had caused internal polling data to be shared with Kilimnik, and the sharing continued for some period of time after their August meeting. Fall 2016. On October 7, 2016, the media released video of candidate Trump speaking in graphic terms about women years earlier, which was considered damaging to his candidacy. Less than an hour later, WikiLeaks made its second release: thousands of John Podesta \' s emails that had been stolen by the GRU in late March 2016. The FBI and other U.S. government institutions were at the time continuing their investigation of suspected Russian government efforts to interfere in the presidential election. That same day, October 7, the Department of Homeland Security and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence issued a joint public statement "that the Russian Government directed the recent compromises of e-mails from US persons and institutions, including from US political organizations ." Those "thefts" and the "disclosures " of the hacked materials through online platforms such as WikiLeaks, the statement continued, "are intended to interfere with the US election process." Post-2016 Election. Immediately after the November 8 election , Russian government officials and prominent Russian businessmen began trying to make inroads into the new administration. The most senior levels of the Russian government encouraged these efforts. The Russian Embassy made contact hours after the election to congratulate the President-Elect and to arrange a call with President Putin. Several Russian businessmen picked up the effort from there. Kirill Dmitriev, the chief executive officer of Russia\'s sovereign wealth fund, was among the Russians who tried to make contact with the incoming administration. In early December , a business associate steered Dmitriev to Erik Prince, a supporter of the Trump Campaign and an associate of senior Trump advisor Steve Bannon. Dmitriev and Prince later met face-to-face in January 2017 in the Seychelles and discussed U.S.-Russia relations. During the same period , another business associate introduced Dmitriev to a friend of Jared Kushner who had not served on the Campaign or the Transition Team. Dmitriev and Kushner\'s friend collaborated on a short written reconciliation plan for the United States and Russia, which Dmitriev implied had been cleared through Putin. The friend gave that proposal to Kushner before the inauguration , and Kushner later gave copies to Bannon and incoming Secretary of State Rex Tillerson. On December 29, 2016, then-President Obama imposed sanctions on Russia for having interfered in the election. Incoming National Security Advisor Michael Flynn called Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak and asked Russia not to escalate the situation in response to the sanctions. The following day, Putin announced that Russia would not take retaliatory measures in response to the sanctions at that time. Hours later , President-Elect Trump tweeted, "Great move on delay (by V. Putin)." The next day, on December 31, 2016, Kislyak called Flynn and told him the request had been receiv ed at the highest levels and Russia had chosen not to retaliate as a result of Flynn\'s request. *** On January 6, 2017 , members of the intelligence community briefed President-Elect Trump on a joint assessment-drafted and coordinated among the Central Intellig ence Agency, FBI, and 7 NA U.S. Department of Justice Atterttey \'Nerk Prndttet // Mtty Cetttttitt Moterisl Preteeted Uttder Fed. R. Crim . P. 6(e) National Security Agency-that concluded with high confidence that Russia had intervened in the election through a variety of means to assist Trump\'s candidacy and harm Clinton \' s. A declassified version of the assessment was publicly released that same day. Between mid-January 2017 and early February 2017, three congressional committees -the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI), and the Senate Judiciary Committee (SJC)-announced              that they would conduct inquiries, or had already been conducting inquiries, into Russian interference in the election. Then-FBI Director James Comey later confirmed to Congress the existence of the FBI\'s investigation into Russian interference that had begun before the election. On March 20, 2017, in open-session testimony before HPSCI, Comey stated: I have been authorized by the Department of Justice to confirm that the FBI, as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating the Russian government\'s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election, and that includes investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government and whether there was any coordination between the campaign and Russia \' s efforts ....    As with any counterintelligence investigation, this will also include an assessment of whether any crimes were committed. The investigation continued under then-Director Comey for the next seven weeks until May 9, 2017, when President Trump fired Comey as FBI Director-an action which is analyzed in Volume II of the rep01t. On May 17, 2017, Acting Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed the Special Counsel and authorized him to conduct the investigation that Comey had confirmed in his congressional testimony, as well as matters arising directly from the investigation , and any other matters within the scope of 28 C.F .R. § 600.4(a), which generally covers efforts to interfere with or obstruct the investigation. President Trump reacted negatively to the Specia l Counsel\'s appointment. He told advisors that it was the end of his presidency, sought to have Attorney General Jefferson (Jeff) Sessions unrecuse from the Russia investigation and to have the Special Counse l removed, and engaged in efforts to curtail the Specia l Counsel\'s investigation and prevent the disclosure of evidence to it, including through public and private contacts with potential witnesses. Those and related actions are described and ana lyzed in Volume II of the report. *** THE SPECIAL COUNSEL\'S CHARGING DECISIONS In reaching the charging decisions described in Volume 1 of the report, the Office determined whether the conduct it found amounted to a violation of federal criminal law chargeable under the Principles of Federal Prosecution. See Justice Manual § 9-27.000 et seq. (2018). The standard set forth in the Justice Manual is whether the conduct constitutes a crime ; if so, whether admissib le evidence would probably be sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction; 8 NA U.S. Department of Justice A1:1:erHey \\¥erk Predt1et // Mey CeHtttiHMatel\'ial Pl\'eteeted UHder Fed. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) and whether prosecution would serve a substantial federal interest that could not be adequately served by prosecution elsewhere or through non-criminal alternatives. See Justice Manual § 9- 27 .220. Section V of the report provides detailed explanations of the Office\'s charging decisions, which contain three main components. First, the Office determined that Russia\'s two principal interference operations in the 2016 U.S. presidential election-the social media campaign and the hacking-and-dumping operations- violated U.S. criminal law. Many of the individuals and entities involved in the social media campaign have been charged with participating in a conspiracy to defraud the United States by undermining through deceptive acts the work of federal agencies charged with regulating foreign influence in U.S. elections , as well as related counts of identity theft . See United States v. Internet Research Agency, et al., No. 18-cr-32 (D.D.C.) . Separately, Russian intelligence officers who carried out the hacking into Democratic Party computers and the personal email accounts of individuals affiliated with the Clinton Campaign conspired to violate , among other federal laws, the federal computer-intrusion statute, and the have been so char ed. See United States v. Ne ksho, et al., No. 18-cr-215 D.D.C .. Second, while the investigation identified numerous links between individuals with ties to the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign, the evidence was not sufficient to support criminal charges. Among other things, the evidence was not sufficient to charge any Campaign official as an unregistered agent of the Russian government or other Russian principal. And our evidence about the June 9, 2016 meeting and WikiLeaks \' s releases of hacked materials was not sufficient to charge a criminal campaign-finance violation. Further, the evidence was not sufficient to charge that any member of the Trump Campaign conspired with representatives of the Russian government to interfere in the 2016 election. Third, the investigation established that several individuals affiliated with the Trump Campaign lied to the Office, and to Congress, about their interactions with Russian-affiliated individuals and related matters. Those lies materially impaired the investigation of Russian election interference. The Office charged some of those lies as violations of the federal false- statements statute. Former National Security Advisor Michael Flynn pleaded guilty to lying about his interactions with Russian Ambassador Kislyak during the transition period. George Papadopoulos, a foreign policy advisor during the campaign period , pleaded guilty to lying to investigators about, inter alia, the nature and timing of his interactions with Joseph Mifsud, the professor who told Papadopoulos that the Russians had dirt on candidate Clinton .in the form of thousands of emails. Former Trump Organization attorney Michael Cohen leaded uilt to makin false statements to Con ress about the Trum Moscow ro ·ect. 9 NA U.S. Department of Justice AttorAe:y•Work Proa1:1et // MieyCotttaiAMaterialPFOteeteaUttaerFea. R. Crim. P. 6(e) Manafort lied to the Office and the grand jury concerning his interactions and communications with Konstantin Kilimnik about Trump Campaign polling data and a peace plan for Ukraine. *** The Office investigated several other events that have been publicly repot1ed to involve potential Russia-related contacts. For example, the investigation established that interactions between Russian Ambassador Kislyak and Trump Campaign officials both at the candidate\'s April 2016 foreign policy speech in Washington, D.C., and during the week of the Republican National Convention were brief, public, and non-substantive. And the investigation did not establish that one Campaign official\'s efforts to dilute a portion of the Republican Party platform on providing assistance to Ukraine were undertaken at the behest of candidate Trump or Russia. The investigation also did not establish that a meeting between Kislyak and Sessions in September 2016 at Sessions\'s Senate office included any more than a passing mention of the presidential campaign. The investigation did not always yield admissible information or testimony, or a complete picture of the activities undertaken by subjects of the investigation. Some individuals invoked their Fifth Amendment right against compelled self-incrimination and were not, in the Office \' s judgment, appropriate candidates for grants of immunity. The Office limited its pursuit of other witnesses and information-such as information known to attorneys or individuals claiming to be members of the media-in light of internal Depa11ment of Justice policies. See, e.g., Justice Manual§§ 9-13.400, 13.410. Some of the information obtained via court process, moreover, was presumptively covered by legal privilege and was screened from investigators by a filter ( or "taint") team. Even when individuals testified or agreed to be interviewed, they sometimes provided information that was false or incomplete, leading to some of the false-statements charges described above. And the Office faced practical limits on its ability to access relevant evidence as well-numerous witnesses and subjects lived abroad, and documents were held outside the United States. Further, the Office learned that some of the individuals we interviewed or whose conduct we investigated-including        some associated with the Trump Campaign---deleted relevant communications or communicated during the relevant period using applications that feature encryption or that do not provide for long-term retention of data or communications records. In such cases , the Office was not able to corroborate witness statements through comparison to contemporaneous communications or fully question witnesses about statements that appeared inconsistent with other known facts. Accordingly, while this report embodies factual and legal determinations that the Office believes to be accurate and complete to the greatest extent possible, given these identified gaps, the Office cannot rule out the possibility that the unavailable information would shed additional light on (or cast in a new light) the events described in the report. 10 NA U.S. Department of Justice Atten\'ley Werk Predttet /,\' Ma:,·Cet\'itaifl:Mct1:erialPreteeted Uneer Fee. R. Criffl. P. 6Ee) I. THE SPECIAL COUNSEL\'S INVESTIGATION On May 17, 2017, Deputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein -t hen serving as Acting Attorney General for the Russia investigation following the recusal of former Attorney General Jeff Sessions on March 2, 2016-appointed              the Special Counsel "to investigate Russian interference with the 2016 presidential election and related matters. " Office of the Deputy Att\'y Gen., Order No. 3915-2017, Appointment of Special Counsel to Investigate Russian Interference with the 2016 Presidential Election and Related Matters, May 17, 2017) ("Appointment Order") . Relying on "the authority vested" in the Acting Attorney General, "including 28 U.S.C. §§ 509, 510, and 515," the Acting Attorney General ordered the appointment of a Special Counsel "in order to discharge [the Acting Attorney General \' s] responsibility to provide supervision and management of the Department of Justice , and to ensure a full and thorough investigation of the Russian government\'s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election." Appointment Order (introduction). "The Special Counsel," the Order stated, "is authorized to conduct the investigation confirmed by then-FBI Director James B. Comey in testimony before the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence on March 20, 2017," including:                  \' (i) any links and/or coordination between the Russian government and individuals associated with the campaign of President Donald Trump; and (ii) any matters that arose or may arise directly from the investigation; and (iii) any other matters within the scope of 28 C.F.R. § 600.4(a). Appointment Order ,r(b). Section 600.4 affords the Special Counsel "the authority to investigate and prosecute federal crimes committed in the course of, and with intent to interfere with, the Special Counsel\'s investigation, such as perjury , obstruction of justice, destruction of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses ." 28 C.F.R . § 600.4(a). The authority to investigate "any matters that arose . .. directly from the investigation ," Appointment Order ,r(b)(ii), covers similar crimes that may have occurred during the course of the FBI\'s confirmed investigation before the Special Counsel\'s appointment. "If the Special Counsel believes it is necessary and appropriate, " the Order further provided, "the Special Counsel is authorized to prosecute federal crimes arising from the investigation of these matters. " Id. ,r(c). Finally, the Acting Attorney General made applicable "Sections 600.4 throu gh 600.10 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations. " Id. ,r(d). The Acting Attorney General further clarified the scope of the Special Counsel\'s investigatory authority in two subsequent memoranda . A memorandum dated August 2, 2017, explained that the Appointment Order had been "worded categorically in order to permit its public release without confirming specific investigations involving specific individuals." It then confirmed that the Special Counsel had been authorized since his appointment to investiga te allegations that three Trump campaign officials-Carter Page, Paul Manafort, and George Papadopoulos - "comm itted a crime or crimes by colluding with Russian government officials with respect to the Russian government\'s efforts to interfere with the 2016 presidential election." The memorandum also confirmed the Special Counsel\'s authority to investigate certain other matters , including two additional sets of allegations involving Manafort (crimes arising from payments he received from the Ukrainian government and crimes arising from his receipt of loans 11 NA U .S. Department of Justice Att:ert1eyWerk Predttet:// Ma~·Cet\'tl:aiAMaterial Pret:eet:edUt1derFed. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) from a bank whose CEO was then seeking a position in the Trump Administration); allegations that Papadopoulos committed a crime or crimes by acting as an unregistered agent of the Israeli government; and four sets of allegations involving Michael Flynn , the former National Security Advisor to President Trump. On October 20, 2017 , the Acting Attorney General confirmed in a memorandum the Special Counsel\'s investigative authority as to several individuals and entities . First , "as part of a full and thorough investigation of the Russian government\'s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election," the Special Counsel was authorized to investigate "the pertinent activities of Michael Cohen , Richard Gates ,                               , Roger Stone, and I"     "Confirmation of the authorization to investigate such individuals, " the memorandum stressed , "does not suggest that the Special Counsel has made a determination that any of them has committed a crime ." Second, with respect to Michael Cohen, the memorandum recognized the Special Counsel \' s authority to investigate " leads relate[d] to Cohen \' s establishment and use of Essential Consultants LLC to, inter alia, receive funds from Russian-backed entities." Third , the memorandum memoriali zed the Special Counsel\'s authority to investigate individuals and entities who were possibly engaged in "jointly undertaken activity" with existing subjects of the investigation , including Paul Manafort. Finally, the memorandum described an FBI investigation opened befor e the Special Counsel\'s appointment into "allegations that [then-Attorne y General Jeff Sessions] made false statements to the United States Senate[,]" and confirmed the Special Counsel\'s authority to investigate that matter. The Special Counsel structured the investigation in view of his power and authorit y "to exercise all investigative and prosecutorial functions of any United States Attorney." 28 C.F.R: § 600 .6. Like a U.S. Attorney \'s Office, the Special Counsel\'s Office considered a range of classified and unclassified information available to the FBI in the course of the Office\'s Russia investigation , and the Office structured that work around evidence for possible use in prosecutions of federal crimes (assuming that one or more crimes were identified that warranted prosecution). There was substantial evidence immediately available to the Special Counsel at the inception of the investigation in May 2017 because the FBI had, by that time , already investigated Russian election interference for nearly 10 months. The Special Counsel\'s Office exercised its jud gment regarding what to investigate and did not , for instance, investigate every public report of a contact between the Trump Campaign and Russian -affiliated individuals and entities . The Office has concluded its investigation into links and coordination between the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign. Certain proceedings associated with the Office\'s work remain ongoing. After consultation with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the Office has transferred responsibility for those remaining issues to other components of the Department of Justice and FBI. Appendix D lists those transfers. Two district courts confirmed the breadth of the Special Counsel\'s authority to investigate Russia election interference and links and/or coordination with the Trump Campaign. See United States v. Manafort , 312 F. Supp . 3d 60, 79-83 (D.D .C. 2018); United States v. Manafort, 321 F. Supp. 3d 640, 650-655 (E.D . Va . 2018). In the course of conducting that investigation, the Office periodically identified evidence of potential criminal activity that was outside the scope of the Special Counsel\'s authority established by the Acting Attorney General. After consultation with 12 NA U.S. Department of Justice Att6rHey 1ilt6rk Pr6dttet // M!t)· C61\\taiAMaterial Pr6teeted Under Fed. R. Crim. P. 6Ee) the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the Office referred that evidence to appropriate law enforcement authorities, principally other components of the Department of Justice and to the FBI. Appendix D summarizes those referrals. ** * To carry out the investigation and prosecution of the matters assigned to him, the Special Counsel assembled a team that at its high point included 19 attorneys-five of whom joined the Office from private practice and 14 on detail or assigned from other Department of Justice components. These attorneys were assisted by a filter team of Department lawyers and FBI personnel who screened materials obtained via court process for privileged information before turning those materials over to investigators; a support staff of three paralegals on detail from the Department \'s Antitrust Division; and an administrative staff of nine responsible for budget, finance, purchasing, human resources , records, facilities, security, information technology , and administrative support. The Special Counsel attorneys and support staff were co-located with and worked alongside approximatel y 40 FBI agents, intelligence analysts, forensic accountants, a paralegal, and professional staff assigned by the FBI to assist the Special Counsel\'s investigation. Those "assigned" FBI employees remained under FBI supervision at all times; the matters on which they assisted were supervised by the Special Counsel. 1 During its investigation the Office issued more than 2,800 subpoenas under the auspices of a grand jury sitting in the District of Columbia; executed nearly 500 search-and-seizure warrants; obtained more than 230 orders for communications records under 18 U.S.C. § 2703(d); obtained almost 50 orders authorizing use of pen registers; made 13 requests to foreign governments pursuant to Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties; and interviewed approximately 500 witnesses, including almost 80 before a grand jury. *** From its inception, the Office recognized that its investigation could identify foreign intelligence and counterintelligence information relevant to the FBI\'s broader national security mission. FBI personnel who assisted the Office established procedures to identify and convey such information to the FBI. The FBI\'s Counterintelligence Division met with the Office regularly for that purpose for most of the Office\'s tenure. For more than the past year, the FBI also embedded personnel at the Office who did not work on the Special Counsel\'s investigation, but whose purpose was to review the results of the investigation and to send-in writing-summaries of foreign intellig ence and counterintelligence information to FBIHQ and FBI Field Offices. Those communications and other correspondence between the Office and the FBI contain information derived from the investigation, not all of which is contained in this Volume. This Volume is a summary. It contains, in the Office\'s judgment, that information necessary to account for the Special Counsel\'s prosecution and declination decisions and to describe the investigation \'s main factual results. 1 FBI  personnel assigned to the Special Counsel\'s Office were required to adhere to all applicable federal law and all Department and FBI regulations, guidelines , and policies. An FBI attorney worked on FBI-related matters for the Office, such as FBI compliance with all FBI policies and procedures, including the FBI\'s Domestic Investigations and Operations Guide (DIOG). That FBI attorney worked under FBI legal superv ision, not the Special Counsel\'s supervision. 13 NA U.S. Department of Justice AUorttey Work Proattet // Mtt\'.)CotttttittMttterittlPrnteetea Uttaer Fee . R. Crim. P. 6(e) 1 II.  RUSSIAN "ACTIVE MEASURES" SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGN The first form of Russian election influence came principally from the Internet Research Agency, LLC (IRA), a Russian organization funded by Yevgeniy Viktorovich Prigozhin and companies he controlled, including Concord Management and Consulting LLC and Concord Catering (collectively "Concord"). 2 The IRA conducted social media operations targeted at large U.S. audiences with the goal of sowing discord in the U.S. political system. 3 These operations constituted "active measures" (aKTMBHbie          Meporrprumu1),a term that typically refers to operations conducted by Russian security services aimed at influencing the course of international affairs. 4 The IRA and its employees began operations targeting the United States as early as 2014. Using fictitious U.S. personas, IRA employees operated social media accounts and group pages designed to attract U.S. audiences. These groups and accounts, which addressed divisive U.S. political and social issues, falsely claimed to be controlled by U.S. activists. Over time, these social media accounts became a means to reach large U.S. audiences. IRA employees travelled to the United States in mid-2014 on an intelligence-gathering mission to obtain information and photographs for use in their social media posts. IRA employees posted derogatory information about a number of candidates in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. By early to mid-2016, IRA operations included supporting the Trump Campaign and disparaging candidate Hillary Clinton. The IRA made various expenditures to carry out those activities , including buying political advertisements on social media in the n...en June 1.2016 and 13 C-18 NA U.S. Department of Justice Attert1ey Werk Preelttet // Mft)\' CefttEtiHMEtteriEtl Prateeteel UHder Fed. R. Cri1fl.P. 6(e) November 8, 2016. I do not recall discussing WikiLeaks with him, nor do I recall being aware of Mr. Stone having discussed WikiLeaks with individuals associated with my campaign, although I was aware that WikiLeaks was the subject of media reporting and campaign-related discussion at the time. Response to Question II, Part (h) I do not recall having had any discussion during the campaign regarding a pardon or action to benefit Julian Assange. Response to Question II, Part (i) I do not recall being aware during the campaign of specific effo11s by foreign individuals or companies to assist my campaign through the use of social media postings or the organization of rallies. III.     The Trump Organization Moscow Project a.       In October 2015, a "Letter of Intent," a copy of which is attached as Exhibit B, was signed for a proposed Trump Organization project in Moscow (the "Trump Moscow project"). 1.      When were you first informed of discussions about the Trump Moscow project? By whom? What were you told about the project? ii.     Did you sign the letter of intent? b.       In a statement provided to Congress, attached as Exhibit C, Michael Cohen stated: "To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Trump was never in contact with anyone about this proposal other than me on three occasions, including signing a non-binding letter of intent in 2015." Describe all discussions you had with Mr. Cohen, or anyone else associated with the Trump Organization, about the Trump Moscow project, including who you spoke with, when, and the substance of the discussion(s). c.       Did you learn of any communications between Michael Cohen or Felix Sater and any Russian government officials, including officials in the office of Dmitry Peskov, regarding the Trump Moscow project? If so, identify who provided this info1mation to you, when, and the substance of what you learned. d.       Did you have any discussions between June 2015 and June 2016 regarding a potential trip to Russia by you and/or Michael Cohen for reasons related to the Trump Moscow project? If yes, describe who you spoke with, when, and the substance of the discussion(s). e.       Did you at any time direct or suggest that discussions about the Trump Moscow project 14 C-19 NA U.S. Depa11rnentof Justice A1:ten~eyWerk Prea1:iet// May Cefltttifl Material Prnteetea Uf1ae1•Feel.R. Crim. P. 6(e) should cease, or were you informed at any time that the project had been abandoned? If yes, describe who you spoke with, when, the substance of the discussion(s), and why that decision was made. f.       Did you have any discussions regarding what information would be provided publicly or in response to investigative inquiries about potential or actual investments or business deals the Trump Organization had in Russia, including the Trump Moscow project? If yes, describe who you spoke with, when, and the substance of the discussion(s). g.       Aside from the Trump Moscow project, did you or the Trump Organization have any other prospective or actual business interests, investments, or arrangements with Russia or any Russian interest or Russian individual during the campaign? If yes, describe the business interests, investments, or arrangements. Response to Question III , Parts (a) through (g) Sometime in 2015, Michael Cohen suggested to me the possibility of a Trump Organization project in Moscow. As I recall, Mr. Cohen described this as a proposed project of a general type we have done in the past in a variety of locations. I signed the non-binding Letter of Intent attached to your questions as Exhibit B which required no equity or expenditure on our end and was consistent with our ongoing efforts to expand into significant markets around the world. I had few conversations with Mr. Cohen on this subject. As I recall, they were brief, and they were not memorable. I was not enthused about the proposal, and 1 do not recall any discussion of travel to Russia in connection with it. I do not remember discussing it with anyone else at the Trump Organization, although it is possible. I do not recall being aware at the time of any communications between Mr. Cohen or Felix Sater and any Russian government official regarding the Letter of Intent. In the course of preparing to respond to your questions, I have become aware that Mr. Cohen sent an email regarding the Letter of Intent to "Mr. Peskov" at a general, public email account, which should show there was no meaningful relationship with people in power in Russia. I understand those documents already have been provided to you. I vaguely remember press inquiries and media reporting during the campaign about whether the Trump Organization had business dealings in Russia. I may have spoken with campaign staff or Trump Organization employees regarding responses to requests for information, but 1 have no current recollection of any particular conversation, with whom L may have spoken, when, or the substance of any conversation. As I recall, neither I nor the Trump Organization had any projects or proposed projects in Russia during the campaign other than the Letter of Tntent. IV.      Contacts with Russia and Russia-Related Issues During the Campaign a.       Prior to mid-August 2016 , did you become aware that Paul Manafort had ties to the Ukrainian government? If yes, describe who you learned this information from, when, and the substance of what you were told. Did Mr. Manafort\'s connections to the Ukrainian or 15 C-20 NA U.S. Department of Justice AtternC)"Werk Pretlttct // May Contain Material Pretcctctl Untlcr Fctl. R. Cri1t1.P. 6(c) Russian governments play any role in your decision to have him join your campaign? If yes, describe that role. b.      Were you aware that Paul Manafort offered briefings on the progress of your campaign to Oleg Deripaska? lf yes, describe who you learned this information from, when, the substance of what you were told, what you understood the purpose was of sharing such information with Mr. Deripaska, and how you responded to learning this information. c.      Were you aware of whether Paul Manafort or anyone else associated with your campaign sent or directed others to send internal Trump campaign information to any person located in Ukraine or Russia or associated with the Ukrainian or Russian governments? If yes, identify who provided you with this information, when, the substance of the discussion(s), what you understood the purpose was of sharing the internal campaign information, and how you responded to learning this information. d.      Did Paul Manafort communicate to you, directly or indirectly. any positions Ukraine or Russia would want the U.S. to support? If yes, describe when he communicated those positions to you and the substance of those communications. e.      During the campaign, were you told about efforts by Russian officials to meet with you or senior members of your campaign? If yes, describe who you had conversations with on this topic, when, and what you were told. f.      What role, if any, did you have in changing the Republican Party platform regarding arming Ukraine during the Republican National Convention? Prior to the convention, what information did you have about this platform provision? After the platform provision was changed, who told you about the change, when did they tell you, what were you told about why it was changed, and who was involved? g.      On July 27, 2016, in response to a question about whether you would recognize Crimea as Russian territory and lift sanctions on Russia, you said: "We\' ll be looking at that. Yeah, we\'ll be looking." Did you intend to communicate by that statement or at any other time during the campaign a willingness to lift sanctions and/or recognize Russia\'s annexation of Crimea if you were elected? 1.      What consideration did you give to lifting sanctions and/or recognizing Russia\'s annexation of Crimea if you were elected? Describe who you spoke with about this topic, when, the substance of the discussion(s). Response to Question IV, Parts (a) through (d) Mr. Manafort was hired primarily because of his delegate work for prior presidential candidates, including Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and Bob Dole. I knew that Mr. Manafort had done international consulting work and, at some time before Mr. Manafort left the 16 C-21 NA U.S. Department of Justice Attertte:,· Werk Preettet // Ma:,· Cetttaitt Material Prnteetee Uttee1•Fee. R. Crim. P. 6(e) campaign, I learned that he was somehow involved with individuals concerning Ukraine, but I do not remember the specifics of what I knew at the time. l had no knowledge of Mr. Manafort offering briefings on the progress of my campaign to an individual named Oleg Deripaska, nor do I remember being aware of Mr. Manafort or anyone else associated with my campaign sending or directing others to send internal Trump Campaign information to anyone I knew to be in Ukraine or Russia at the time or to anyone I understood to be a Ukrainian or Russian government employee or official. I do not remember Mr. Manafort communicating to me any particular positions Ukraine or Russia would want the United States to support. Response to Question IV, Part (e) I do not recall being told during the campaign of efforts by Russian officials to meet with me or with senior members of my campaign. In the process of preparing to respond to these questions, I became aware that on March 17, 2016, my assistant at the Trump Organization, Rhona Graff, received an email from a Sergei Prikhodko, who identified himself as Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Foundation Roscongress, inviting me to participate in the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum to be held in June 2016. The documents show that Ms. Graff prepared for my signature a brief response declining the invitation. I understand these documents already have been produced to you. Response to Question IV, Part (t) I have no recollection of the details of what, when, or from what source I first learned about the change to the platform amendment regarding arming Ukraine, but I generally recall learning of the issue as pa1t of media reporting. I do not recall being involved in changing the language to the amendment. Response to Question IV, Part (g) My statement did not communicate any position. V.       Contacts with Russia and Russia-Related Issues During the Transition a.       Were you asked to attend the World Chess Championship gala oo November JO, 2016? If yes, who asked you to attend, when were you asked, and what were you told about about [sic] why your presence was requested? 1.      Did you attend any part of the event? If yes, describe any interactions you had with any Russians or representatives of the Russian government at the event. 17 C-22 NA U.S. Department of Justice AtterAey \\\\\'erk Preettet // Ma)\' Certtairt Material Preteetee Urteer Fee. R. Crim. P. 6(e1 Response to Question V, Part (a) I do not remember having been asked to attend the World Chess Champions hip gala, and I did not attend the event. During the course of preparing to respond to these questions , I have become aware of documents indicating that in March of 2016,the president of the World Chess Federation invited the Trump Organization to host, at Trump Tower, the 2016 World Chess Championship Match to be held in New York in November 2016. r have also become aware that in November 2016 , there were press inquiries to my staff regarding whether I had plans to attend the tournament , which was not being held at Trump Tower. I understand these documents have already been provided to you. Execut d on   NOfl&M,lf.rc,J,.0,              2018 President of the United States 18 C-23 NA U.S. Department of Justice AtterRe:,· Werk Preattet // May CatttaiR Material Preteetea Uttaer Fea. R. Crim. P. 6(e) NA U.S. Department of Justice AMerttey Werk Prec:ittet// May Cetttaitt Material Preteetecl Uttc:ierFecl. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) AppendixD NA U.S. Department of Justice Attome:, Work Proattet // Ma:,-Cof!:tttif!: Ma:tefittlProteetea UHaef Fee. R. Crim . P. 6(e) NA U.S. Department of Justice AttorHey Work Proattet // MB:)"CoHtB:iHMaterial Proteetea UHaer Fea . R. Crim. P. 6(e) APPENDIXD SPECIAL COUNSEL\'S OFFICE TRANSFERRED , REFERRED, AND COMPLETED CASES This appendix identifies matters transferred or referred by the Special Couns el\'s Office, as well as cases prosecuted by the Office that are now completed. A. Transfers The Special Counsel\'s Office has concluded its investigation into links and coordination betwe en the Russian government and individuals associated with the Trump Campaign. Certain matters assigned to the Office by the Acting Attorney General have not fully concluded as of the date of this report. After consultation with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the Office has transferred responsibility for those matters to other components of the Department of Justice and the FBI. Those transfers include: 1. United States v. Bijan Rafiekian and Kami! Ekim Alptekin US. Attorney\'s Office for the Eastern District of Virginia (Awaiting trial) The Acting Attorney General authorized the Special Counsel to investigate, among other things, po ssible criminal conduct by Michael Flynn in acting as an unregi stered agent for the Government of Turkey . See August 2, 2017 Memorandum from Rod J. Rosenstein to Robert S. Mueller, III. The Acting Attorn ey General later confirmed the Special Counsel\'s authorit y to investigate Rafiekian and Alptekin becaus e they "may have been jointly involved" with Flynn in FARA-related crimes. See October 20, 2017 Memorandum from Associate Depu ty Attorney General Scott Schools to Deputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein. On December 1, 2017 , Flynn pleaded guilty to an Information charging him with making false statements to the FBI about his contacts with the Ru ssian ambassador to the United States. As part of that plea, Flynn agreed to a Statement of the Offens e in which he acknowled ged that the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) document s he filed on March 7, 2017 "contained materially false statements and omis sions." Flynn \' s plea occurr ed before the Special Counsel had made a final decision on whether to charge Rafiekian or Alptekin. On March 27, 2018, after consultati on with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General , the Special Counsel \' s Office referred the investigation of Rafiekian and Alpt ekin to the National Security Divi sion (N SD) for any action it deemed appropriate. The Special Counsel \'s Office determined the referral was appropria te becau se the investigation of Flynn had been completed , and that investigation had provid ed the rationale for the Office \' s investigation of Rafiekian and Alptekin. At NS D\' s request, the Eastern District of Virginia continued the investigation of Rafiekian and Alptekin . 2. United States v. Michael Flynn US. Attorney\'s Officefor the District of Columbia (A waiting sentencing) 0-1 NA U.S. Department of Justice At\'lertle)\' \'.\\\'erk Preauet // Ma)\'\' CeAtaiA Material Preteetea UAaer Fee. R. Crim . P. 6(e) 3. United States v. Richard Gates U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia (Awaiting sentencing) 4. United States v. Internet Research Agency, et al. (Russian Social Media Campaign) U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia National Security Division (Post-indictment, pre-arrest & pre-trial 1) 5. United States v. Konstanti n Kilimnik U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia (Post-indictment, pre-arrest) 6. United States v. Paul Manafort U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the Eastern District of Virginia (Post-conviction) 7. United States v. Viktor Netyksho, et al. (Russian Hacking Operations) U.S. Attorney \'s Office for the Western District of Pennsylvania National Security Division (Post-indictment , pre-arrest) 8. United States v. William Samuel Patten U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia (Awaiting sentencing) The Acting Attorney General authorized the Special Counsel to investigate aspects of Patten\'s conduct that related to another matter that was under investigation by the Office. The investigation uncovered evidence of a crime; the U.S . Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia handled the prosecution of Patten. 9. Harm to Ongoing Matter (Investigation ongoing) The Acting Attorney General authorized the Special Counsel to investigate , among other things, crime or crimes arising out of payments Paul Manafort received from the Ukrainian government before and during the tenure of President Viktor Yanukovych. See August 2, 2017 Memorandum from Rod J. Rosenstein to Robert S. Mueller , Ill. The Acting Attorney General 1 One defendant , Concord Management & Consulting LLC , appeared through counsel and is in pre- trial litigation. D-2 NA U.S. Department of Justice Attorney Work Pree1:1et// May ContaiH Material Preteetee Uneer Fee. R. Criffl. P. 6(e) ,                                            !      Harm to Ongoing Matter On October 27, 2017, Paul Manafort and Richard Gates were charged in the District of Columbia with various crimes (including FARA) in connection with work they performed for Russia-backed political entities in Ukraine. On February 22, 2018, Manafort and Gates were charged in the Eastern District of Virginia with various other crimes in connection with the payments they received for work performed for Russia-backed political entities in Ukraine . During the course of its                         , the Special Counsel\'s Office developed substantial evidence with respect to individuals and enti ies that wer On February 23, 2018, Gates pleaded guilty in the District of Columbia to a multi- object conspiracy and to making false statements; the remaining charges against Gates were dismissed .3 Thereafter, in consultation with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the Special Counsel\'s Office closed the                                        and referred them    1if•rn•  for further investigation as it deemed appropriate. The Office based its decision to close those matters on its mandate, the indictments .ofManafort, Gates\'s plea, and its determination as to how best to allocate its resources, among other reasons; At Harm to Ongoing Matter                                             d the investigation of those closed matters. 10. United States v. Roger Stone US . Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia (Awaiting trial) 1 I. Harm to Ongoing Matter (Investigation ongoing) B. Referrals During the course of the investigation, the Office periodically identified evidence of potential criminal activity _that was outside the scope of the Special Counsel\'s jurisdiction established by the Acting Attorney General. After consultation with the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, the Office referred that evidence to appropriate law enforcement authorities , principally other components of the Department of Justice and the FBI. Those referrals, listed 3 Manafort was ultimately convicted at trial in the Eastern District of Virginia and pleaded guilty in the District of Columbia. See Vol. I, Section IV.A.8. The trial and plea happened after the transfer decision described here. D-3 NA U.S. Department of Justice Att:orHe~·Work Proattet // Mtty CoHtttiHMutefittl Pfoteetea UHaef Fee. R. Cfiffl. P. G(e) alphabetically by subject, are summarized below. 2. Michael Cohen During the course of the investigation, the Special Counsel\'s Office uncovered evidence of potential wire fraud and FECA violations pertaining to Michael Cohen. That evidence was referred to the U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the Southern District of New York and the FBI\'s New York Field Office. 4.  lirllllll 5.                                   Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP During the course of the FARA investigation of Paul Manafort and Rick Gates, the Special Counsel\'s Office uncovered evidence of potential FARA violations pertaining to Gregory Cra ig, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP (Skadden) , and their work on behalf of the government of Ukraine . After consu ltation with the NSD, the evidence regarding Craig                          was referred to NSD, and NSD elected to partne_r with the U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the Southern District of New York and the FBI\'s New York Field Office. NSD later elected to partner on the Craig matter with the U.S. Attorney\'s Office for the District of Columbia. NSD retained and handled issues relating to Skadden itself. 6 Harm to Ongoing Matter 0-4 NA U.S . Department of Justice At:terAey Werk Pretittet // Ma, · CeAtaiA Material Preteeteti UAtier Feti. R. Crim. P. 6(e) Harm to Ongoing Matter Harm to Ongoing Matter Harm to Ongoing Matter Harm to Ongoing Matter D-5 NA U .S. Department of Justice Atterney Werk PreElttet// May Centttin Mtl-terittlPreteeteEIUnElerFeel. R. Crim. P. 6(e) 14.~ Harm to Ongoing Matter Harm to Ongoing Matter C. Completed Prosecutions In three cases prosecuted by the Special Counsel\'s Office, the defendants have completed or are about to complete their terms of imprisonment. Because no further proceedings are likely in any case, responsibility for them has not been transferred to any other office or component. 1. United States v. George Papadopoulos Post-conviction, Completed term of imprisonment (December 7, 2018) 2. United States v. Alex van der Zwaan Post-conviction, Completed term of imprisonment (June 4, 2018) 3. United States v. Richard Pinedo Post-conviction , Currently in Residential Reentry Center (release date May 13, 2019) 0-6 NA'